>> Anjana Vakil: In addition to functional
purity or sort of a consequence, again,
of our wanting to do programming
deterministically and
with minimal cases where the thing
changed out from underneath
me in a way I didn't expect,
we wanna avoid mutating data.
So when I say mutating data,
I don't just mean getting it
bitten by a radioactive spider and
giving it superpowers,
I mean changing the data in place,
we say, or sort of the same entity,
like an array, for
example, now has different
values inside of it.
So that's what we call
changing data in-place and
mutability and in immutable land,
we don't want to do that.
We never wanna,
let's say we take in an array,
we never wanna mess with that
original array that we took in.
Instead of changing it in-place,
we want to replace it with
an updated new version of the array
without messing with the original version.
>> Anjana Vakil: So, let's take
a very simple array as an example.
We've got a bunch of cities in
an array that are cities in
India that those names
are super outdated and
colonial and we don't like them anymore,
some of them.
So for example, Bombay,
which is what the city, for example,
my dad grew up in,
which was called Bombay when I was a kid,
is no longer called Bombay,
it is called Mumbai.
So we need to update this data.
And in a mutating way, we could
update it by assigning a new value,
Mumbai, to the element at
index one in the array, right?
And we're used to doing this
in our JavaScript code,
hopefully reasonably often.
And so now cities is different.
Before cities had Bombay in it,
now it does not.
It has Mumbai instead.
Cities itself, same array.
As far as JavaScript is concerned,
it's the same thing that it's
pointing to in its memory.
Okay, the problem with that is,
okay, maybe we won't
get into it in this particular case,
but if an array or
any kind of value changes out
from under me that means, again,
we have state, we have a value
that is changing over time,
a single value cities is now
talking about different data.
So if I were to run a function that
used cities at two different points,
one before the update and
one after now I am having the pain
of stateful headaches
[LAUGH] in my programming.
So instead, what we wanna do,
is not update the old object,
in this case,
an array, but rather create a new one that
has the correct data or the updated data.
So one way we could do that
here is by using, in this case,
we can use the built in map.
It's pretty pure.
It returns a new array.
It doesn't mutate the array, but
we could also use our helper map function.
We're going to take each thing in
the array of the original old cities and
then decide if we need to update it or
not, essentially.
And if we do, we will return
the corresponding new value.
So in this case we're saying, okay, Delhi?
Yep, that's still Delhi, continue.
Bombay?
Nope, new name, Mumbai.
Bangalore?
Nope, new name, Bengaluru.
So what we return then, so
this is the inner function here,
this a transformer function that we
pass in to our higher order map,
is then just gonna take in the old
data and return the new data.
And map is gonna take care of doing
that for everything in the array and
then returning a new array
with that transformation.
Crucially, old cities never changes.
So if my coworker was working
with the old cities array and
their tests would fail if I swapped out
all the values, they're still good.
Old cities is still old cities.
New cities is new data that I can work
with that is based on that old city data.
All right.
>> Anjana Vakil: No,
you might be wondering, okay,
that's fine if we have three things in
an array, but every time we use a map or
a filter or reduce,
we're turning a new array.
That means we have to create
more space for more data, right?
We're keeping the old data around and
adding the new data to our program
somewhere, so it has to remember
all of that stuff in memory.
We're gonna start taking up
a bunch of space, [LAUGH].
And it might also become
pretty inefficient
if we are dealing with very complex data.
And so there can start to be similarly
with recursion, but we started to
run into some performance problems
once we get larger and larger inputs.
There can also be some issues to
this whole copy instead of mutate
strategy like make a new modified copy
instead of changing the original.
>> Anjana Vakil: And that can become
pretty inefficient in both time and
space concerns.
And so there is a strategy or
a entity, I guess,
in a lot of functional programming,
languages and toolkits and
things like that that helps
us deal with that problem.
And you'll sometimes hear them
called immutable data structures.
And this is essentially a special type of
array in this case, but you could also
imagine an object or what have you that
we can create copies of that are a little
bit more efficient than just copying every
single thing in the array all the time.
So you might hear them called
immutable data structures.
You might also sometimes hear them
called persistent data structures,
they are a really, I think, really cool,
fascinating implementation detail,
essentially, that we're not
gonna spend too much time on.
But wanna think about it a little bit,
that is a kind of very clever way of
helping us, instead of allocating if we
have an array with a bunch of elements and
we need to update it, we would have to
allocate a whole new array of that same
old length if we're working
with regular data structures.
If we're working with
immutable data structures,
they have special optimizations baked in
that help us only copy the changing parts.
So essentially, what persistent
data structures do is they,
on the surface, look like an array.
But under the hood,
they're actually trees that take, okay,
let's say we had an array of zoo
animals that started with a monkey and
then there was a bunny, and then there was
a panda and a bear and a blah, blah, blah.
And now it's, a UFO just landed and
squashed the bunny.
But now we have a new animal
on the planet, it's an alien.
And so if I wanted to create
an updated array with
just one value changed,
like bunny becomes alien.
I don't wanna have to make new copies of
all the same stuff that didn't change.
So what persistent data structures let us
do is, if I had my original array on call,
it was called zoo,
then when I create my updated array,
which we'll call new, I only need
to make a copy of the values, and
in this case, it clumps some of
the values together cuz doing on each
individual value isn't always so
efficient.
So it might make, let's say in this case,
it's chunking them into twos.
We update that node in this
tree with the new value.
And in this case, yeah, we had a little
bit of copying, we copied the monkey.
And then,
>> Anjana Vakil: The data
structure points to the rest
of the same old data
that we already had in memory without
having to create a new copy of it.
So essentially, and there's a lot
more that could be said about this,
and I also have some links in the further
reading that you can dig into.
But essentially, what we're doing
is we're leveraging some very
clever trickery under the hood to
make it much faster when I want
to copy that new array that
changes just one thing.
I no longer have to allocate new memory
and spend all the time allocating that
memory for each thing in the original
array that didn't change.
I get to skip all the unchanged parts and
just update what I need to.
This is something that is baked into
some functional programming languages,
JavaScript is not one of them.
In JavaScript, we don't have this
kind of functionality out of the box.
Some languages like Clojure, for
example, have these built in.
But what luckily for us, we have,
as I said, a massive ecosystem of other
people who want to do functional
programming in JavaScript, which means
they have implemented these kind of things
for us, and we can take advantage of that.